README.md, before:

# What is This Project About
This project aims to use machine learning tools to identify novel key predictors of malnutrition in elderly people in the New Zealand health care service using the InterRAI-LTCF dataset. This study is approved by the NZ Health and Disability Ethics Committee (HDEC) (Approval number 18/NTB/151).

This project uses the existing CAP_Nutrition from the InterRAI-LTCF dataset and the calculated Mini Nutrition Assessment scores as labels, trains separately on two major model structures, including Random Forest and XGBoost. A grid search on the major hyperparameters is done to automatically configure the models. The result models are evaluated through a confusion matrix to find the best performing ones. The top 12 most important features of all trained models and their importance scores are used to identify predictors of malnutrition.

A model evaluation and comparison interface is developed to provide an easy-to-use graphical interface for researchers who are not familiar with code and wish to compare the performance/feature importance of the two different models.

# Setup
## Python
This project runs on Python 3.12 - Python 3.13
The following code sets up a virtual environment for Python 3.12 and runs the setup script to create folders for further use
```bash
py -3.12 -m venv venv
.\venv\Scripts\activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
python setup.py
```

## .env
Create a `.env` file in the `/` directory with the following content
```
PASSWORD = "The password of the dataset CSV file"
CSV_PATH = "The path of the dataset CSV file (./input/)"
FEATURE_DICT_PATH = "The path of the feature dictionary CSV file (./input/)"
DATASET_FOLDER = "The output folder where the processed dataset .pkl file will be stored (./datasets)"
MODEL_OUTPUT = "The output folder of trained models (./outputs)"
```
Please follow the directory instructions in the bracket above to avoid uploading raw data, datasets, and model files to GitHub

# Models

This folder contains sequence and tabular baselines for predicting malnutrition risk from the interRAI LTCF dataset.

- **LSTM / T-LSTM** — sequence models (T-LSTM is time-aware with time deltas).
- **XGBoost** — gradient-boosted trees for tabular inputs (with feature importance and SHAP).
- **Random Forest** — tree-based baseline for tabular inputs(with feature importance).
- **evaluate_models.py** — trains classic learners (Logistic/SVM/KNN/NB/MLP) on the XGBoost Top-12 features and reports metrics.
- **xgboost_aug.py** — XGBoost variant with data augmentation on the training set.


# How to Run
The following files can be run through Python
- **read_dataset.py**
  This file reads the dataset according to the .env path and stores processed dataframes in .pkl form in the datasets folder.
- **main.py**
  This file uses the dataframes in the datasets folder to train models accordingly. The result is printed in the console and stored in the outputs folder.
- **GUI.py**
  This file opens the graphical interface that is used to evaluate and compare models. It can also run with just one model.
- **./models/LSTM/**
  The four files under this directory are training files of LSTM models. Simply runs the file to start the training. Modify the dataset path in the `__main__` function manually.

# How to use GUI
## Launch
from the project root 
``` bash
python GUI.py
```
## File types the tool expects
- Dataset Path: `.pkl` (pickled pandas DataFrame) or `.csv`
- Model Path: `.pkl` / `.joblib` (a trained model object with a predict() method)

The GUI auto-detects by file extension and syncs the PKL / CSV radio.
If you accidentally select a model in the dataset slot (or vice versa), the tool shows a clear error and resets the path.

## Quick start (single side)

1. **Dataset Path** (A or B) → click Browse, pick a `.pkl` (DataFrame) or `.csv`. The **Format** radio switches automatically. The **Target Column** dropdown populates from your dataset columns.

2. **Target Column** → choose your label (e.g., CAP_Nutrition or Malnutrition).

3. **Model Path** → click Browse, pick your trained model .pkl / .joblib.

4. (Optional) Set **Preprocessing** toggles (apply to both A & B)

5. Click **Run A** (or **Run B**) to evaluate.

The bottom status bar shows progress and results will render under the **Model A Details** or **Model B Details** tabs.

## Compare A vs B
1. Fill **both** panels (dataset + target + model).

2. Click **Run A & B and Compare**.

3. Open the **Comparison** tab for side-by-side metrics, confusion matrices, feature importance, and SHAP comparisons.

Buttons are disabled during runs to avoid duplicate jobs.

## Results Tabs
Each side has the same tabs:

- **Accuracy** — overall score

- **Confusion Matrix** — per-class counts

- **Classification Report** — precision / recall / F1 (per class + averages)

- **Feature Importance** — if provided by the model (e.g., tree models)

- **SHAP Analysis** — beeswarm plots

  - Binary: positive-class beeswarm

  - Multiclass: per-class beeswarms

- **Feature Alignment** — shows how input features matched the model’s expected features

The **Comparison** tab provides side-by-side views and aligns class labels across A & B.

# Suggestion of Future Work
## Improvement on Data Augmentation
The data augmentation algorithm used in this project does not improve much on the recall score of the minority class. This might be caused by the overly imbalanced dataset, or the algorithm invented some non-existent relationship between features. A better data augmentation algorithm would make the identified features more convincing.

## Better Longitudinal Analysis
The longitudinal analysis method used in this project is overly simplified. A better analysis of a dataset with even assessment intervals and including more features other than the numerical features may allow models to capture underlying relationships between features and malnutrition risk.

Commit message:

Enhance README with statistical tools
Clarified the explanation of data augmentation and added a section on statistical tools for analysis.

README.md, after:

# What is This Project About
This project aims to use machine learning tools to identify novel key predictors of malnutrition in elderly people in the New Zealand health care service using the InterRAI-LTCF dataset. This study is approved by the NZ Health and Disability Ethics Committee (HDEC) (Approval number 18/NTB/151).

This project uses the existing CAP_Nutrition from the InterRAI-LTCF dataset and the calculated Mini Nutrition Assessment scores as labels, trains separately on two major model structures, including Random Forest and XGBoost. A grid search on the major hyperparameters is done to automatically configure the models. The result models are evaluated through a confusion matrix to find the best performing ones. The top 12 most important features of all trained models and their importance scores are used to identify predictors of malnutrition.

A model evaluation and comparison interface is developed to provide an easy-to-use graphical interface for researchers who are not familiar with code and wish to compare the performance/feature importance of the two different models.

# Setup
## Python
This project runs on Python 3.12 - Python 3.13
The following code sets up a virtual environment for Python 3.12 and runs the setup script to create folders for further use
```bash
py -3.12 -m venv venv
.\venv\Scripts\activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
python setup.py
```

## .env
Create a `.env` file in the `/` directory with the following content
```
PASSWORD = "The password of the dataset CSV file"
CSV_PATH = "The path of the dataset CSV file (./input/)"
FEATURE_DICT_PATH = "The path of the feature dictionary CSV file (./input/)"
DATASET_FOLDER = "The output folder where the processed dataset .pkl file will be stored (./datasets)"
MODEL_OUTPUT = "The output folder of trained models (./outputs)"
```
Please follow the directory instructions in the bracket above to avoid uploading raw data, datasets, and model files to GitHub

# Models

This folder contains sequence and tabular baselines for predicting malnutrition risk from the interRAI LTCF dataset.

- **LSTM / T-LSTM** — sequence models (T-LSTM is time-aware with time deltas).
- **XGBoost** — gradient-boosted trees for tabular inputs (with feature importance and SHAP).
- **Random Forest** — tree-based baseline for tabular inputs(with feature importance).
- **evaluate_models.py** — trains classic learners (Logistic/SVM/KNN/NB/MLP) on the XGBoost Top-12 features and reports metrics.
- **xgboost_aug.py** — XGBoost variant with data augmentation on the training set.


# How to Run
The following files can be run through Python
- **read_dataset.py**
  This file reads the dataset according to the .env path and stores processed dataframes in .pkl form in the datasets folder.
- **main.py**
  This file uses the dataframes in the datasets folder to train models accordingly. The result is printed in the console and stored in the outputs folder.
- **GUI.py**
  This file opens the graphical interface that is used to evaluate and compare models. It can also run with just one model.
- **./models/LSTM/**
  The four files under this directory are training files of LSTM models. Simply runs the file to start the training. Modify the dataset path in the `__main__` function manually.

# How to use GUI
## Launch
from the project root 
``` bash
python GUI.py
```
## File types the tool expects
- Dataset Path: `.pkl` (pickled pandas DataFrame) or `.csv`
- Model Path: `.pkl` / `.joblib` (a trained model object with a predict() method)

The GUI auto-detects by file extension and syncs the PKL / CSV radio.
If you accidentally select a model in the dataset slot (or vice versa), the tool shows a clear error and resets the path.

## Quick start (single side)

1. **Dataset Path** (A or B) → click Browse, pick a `.pkl` (DataFrame) or `.csv`. The **Format** radio switches automatically. The **Target Column** dropdown populates from your dataset columns.

2. **Target Column** → choose your label (e.g., CAP_Nutrition or Malnutrition).

3. **Model Path** → click Browse, pick your trained model .pkl / .joblib.

4. (Optional) Set **Preprocessing** toggles (apply to both A & B)

5. Click **Run A** (or **Run B**) to evaluate.

The bottom status bar shows progress and results will render under the **Model A Details** or **Model B Details** tabs.

## Compare A vs B
1. Fill **both** panels (dataset + target + model).

2. Click **Run A & B and Compare**.

3. Open the **Comparison** tab for side-by-side metrics, confusion matrices, feature importance, and SHAP comparisons.

Buttons are disabled during runs to avoid duplicate jobs.

## Results Tabs
Each side has the same tabs:

- **Accuracy** — overall score

- **Confusion Matrix** — per-class counts

- **Classification Report** — precision / recall / F1 (per class + averages)

- **Feature Importance** — if provided by the model (e.g., tree models)

- **SHAP Analysis** — beeswarm plots

  - Binary: positive-class beeswarm

  - Multiclass: per-class beeswarms

- **Feature Alignment** — shows how input features matched the model’s expected features

The **Comparison** tab provides side-by-side views and aligns class labels across A & B.

# Suggestion of Future Work
## Improvement on Data Augmentation
The data augmentation algorithm used in this project does not improve much on the recall score of the minority class. This might be caused by the overly imbalanced dataset, or the algorithm invented some non-existent relationships between features. A better data augmentation algorithm would make the identified features more convincing.

## Better Longitudinal Analysis
The longitudinal analysis method used in this project is overly simplified. A better analysis of a dataset with even assessment intervals and including more features other than the numerical features may allow models to capture underlying relationships between features and malnutrition risk.

## Statistical Tools
Statistical tools could be used to analyze the output feature importance and SHAP values to identify patterns. These analyses can reveal which features consistently contribute most to the predictions across different datasets and models.
